# android logcat

## command examples

`adb logcat [options] [filter] [filter]`      // view device log  
`adb logcat`  
`adb shell logcat`  
`adb shell logcat -c`             // The parameter -c will clear the current logs on the device.  
`adb shell logcat -d > fileName`  // Save the logcat output to a file on the local system.  
`adb shell bugreport > fileName`  // Will dump the whole device information like dumpstate, dumpsys and logcat output.  
`adb bugreport`                   // print bug reports

`adb shell pidof packageName`  
`adb sehll ps | grep pidNumber`

`adb shell logcat -d --pid=xxxPid`
`adb shell logcast | grep -E '^.{N}F'`     // the N+1 character is F

## priority (lowest to highest)

V: Verbose  
D: Debug  
I: Info  
W: Warning  
E: Error  
F: **Fatal**  
S: Silent (highest priority, where nothing is ever printed)

`adb logcat ActivityManager:I MyApp:D *:S`

[RefWeb](https://developer.android.com/tools/logcat)

## distinct sections

They appear in logcat output signify distinct sections within the Android logging system,  
particularly relevant when diagnosing system-level issues or application crashes.

+ beginning of system
+ beginning of kernel
+ **beginning of crash**
+ beginning of main

### beginning of system

This line indicates the start of logs related to the Android system processes and services.  
It marks the point where the Android framework and its core components begin their logging activities after the kernel has initialized.

### beginning of kernel

This line signifies the beginning of the kernel logs.  
These logs originate directly from the Linux kernel running on the Android device and contain information about  
hardware initialization, device drivers, low-level system events, and potential kernel panics or errors.  
This section is crucial for diagnosing issues related to the device's fundamental operation.

### beginning of crash

This line specifically denotes the start of logs related to a crash event, whether it's an application crash  
(e.g., AndroidRuntime exceptions), a native crash, or a system process crash.  
Following this line, detailed stack traces and error messages related to the crash will typically be present,  
providing crucial information for debugging the cause of the crash.

### Summary

These markers help in navigating and understanding the vast amount of information generated by logcat,  
allowing developers and system administrators to quickly pinpoint the relevant sections when investigating specific problems like application instability or device reboots.
